---
layout: default
title: "Computer components"
--- 

#### Processor

##### Basics of a CPU

Processors, or CPU's, are the "beating heart" of a computer, and as such, perform many more tasks than the ones that will be discussed in this text. The focus lies on the floating point calculation capabilities and the memory subsystems, as well as the interfaces.

The traditional CPU ([Central Processing Unit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_processing_unit)) is an Integrated Circuit (IC) that executes the logic, [arithmetic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic), input/output (I/O) and control operations that are prescribed by software running on the computer. As time passed, many other subsystems of computers got integrated into the processor package (die), making the functions that the traditional CPU performs only a subset of all the functions that a modern processor performs. A "core" of a modern processor is a separate unit that performs all the tasks of a traditional CPU.

Modern processor cores are very diverse, complex and multi-faceted, varying wildly with ISA, microarchitecture, intended platform and manufacturer. A discussion about CPU's that would include all these variations would be impossible, necessitating a confinement. This discussion will try to be as generic as possible, but the focus lies on an Intel based server CPU of the "Skylake-SP" microarchitecture.

Intel dominates the PC/laptop as well as the HPC/Supercomputer CPU market, making the restriction towards an Intel x86-64 based CPU justified. Considering the fact that almost all Laptops and workstations contain CPU's that are (to a varying extend) derived from their server oriented counterparts, focusing the discussion around a server CPU seems logical as well. The Skylake-SP microarchitecture was chosen because it is very recent (at the time of writing), contains some very significant advancements for scientific computing workloads and is used in a cluster available to the MEFD group at the TU/e.

##### System on a Chip

Modern processors are best described by the ["System on a Chip" (SoC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_on_a_chip) moniker, containing many of the core components of a computer. As such, most contain the following subsystems:

 - Cores
 - Memory controller
 - Cache
 - Interfaces
 - Graphics (included in most consumer oriented CPU's)

##### Instruction set architecture

An Instruction Set Architecture ([ISA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instruction_set_architecture)) is an abstract model of a computer and contains a collection of machine instruction definitions. Examples of common ISA's are x86-64, x86 and ARM, with x86-64 being the most common ISA for CPU's in servers, as well as consumer oriented computers.

An ISA is one of the most important aspects of a CPU, because it forms the link between software and hardware. ISA's where introduced to make programming software easier, which could now be written in terms of ISA instructions in stead of low level [machine code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_code). This made it possible to execute the same computer program on different computers, without any modification of the code.

An implementation of an ISA, called a [microarchitecture (uarch)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microarchitecture), is the hardware based realization of these machine instruction definitions (disregarding [microcode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microcode)). Any specific uarch can also support extensions to its ISA, common examples are VT-d, AES-NI, SSE4 and AVX2. These extensions are additions to the abstract computer model of an ISA and contain specific instructions to accelerate certain tasks of a computer, like AES data encryption, virtualization and vector mathematics.

Some better known examples of microarchitectures are [Intel i386](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intel_80386), [Intel Nahelem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nehalem_(microarchitecture)), [Intel Haswell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haswell_%28microarchitecture%29), [AMD K8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AMD_K8), [AMD Bulldozer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bulldozer_(microarchitecture)) and [AMD Zen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zen_(microarchitecture)). 

##### Threads and cores

A [thread](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_(computing)) is a chain of instructions that is to be executed by the CPU. Each thread is generated by a process, which can loosely be described as an instance of a computer program. A single core of a CPU can execute one thread at a time, but using a technique called time slicing and the concept of [context switching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Context_switch), can handle multiple threads concurrently.

Multithreading (software) allows a single process to spawn a multitude of threads, dividing the workload of that process. Performance benefits (can) arise when these threads are executed in parallel on multiple cores of a CPU.

The specifications of a CPU may contain references to the number of threads it "has", which should be interpreted as the maximum amount of threads it can "execute" at the same time. The fact that a single CPU core can only execute one thread at a time doesn't change, even if the CPU specifications state that it has more (twice) threads then cores. This has to do with a hardware based technique called simultaneous multithreading ([SMT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simultaneous_multithreading)), which will be discussed later.

##### Cache

Quick access to data is critical for the performance of a CPU, making data flow and storage a mayor aspect of a CPU. The main memory of a computer has a relatively high latency and low bandwidth compared to the needs of modern CPU cores, which is where [cache](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CPU_cache) comes into play.

Cache is storage subsystem of the CPU and acts like a data buffer. It contains, among other things, copies of the data that the CPU (or process) "predicts" it will access often or in the near future, reducing the loading time of that data. The amount of cache placed on the CPU is relatively small, typically about 1:1.000, compared to the amount of main memory placed in a computer. A "cache-miss" refers to the situation where data is requested, but not stored in cache, resulting in a much longer loading time. Avoiding cache-misses is a large part of software (and hardware) optimization and can lead to very substantial performance improvements.

Cache memory pressure (memory nearly full) and the ever increasing speed of CPU cores lead to the development of multiple levels of cache. This layered structure has the advantage that it can address both the memory pressure problem as well as the demand for faster data access, without resulting in prohibitive costs. The upper most layer of cache, L1, has gotten significantly faster over time, but did not really increase much in capacity. The lowest level of cache, typically L3, saw the highest increase in capacity, but is also substantially slower then L1.

The development of multi-core processors and several levels of cache created an additional task for cache; inter-core data communication. Each core has its own private parts of L1 and L2 cache, whereas L3 cache is shared between the cores. This last level of cache is the place where data can be shared between the threads running on the different cores.

Cache memory is a lot faster, and generally superior on many fronts, compared to main memory, because cache is made from SRAM and main memory is made from DRAM. SRAM stands for "Static Random Access Memory", whereas DRAM stands for "Dynamic Random Access Memory". Each SRAM memory cell requires 6 transistors to store a bit, whereas DRAM requires only one transistor (and a small capacitor) per bit. The downside of DRAM is that the capacitors in DRAM memory need to be recharged frequently, causing delays and other problems. This constant refreshing of the stored data gave rise to the name "Dynamic", while "Static" was used for SRAM, because it doesn't need to be refreshed. The extra hardware complexity of SRAM allows it to be much faster than DRAM, but the extra cost and space requirements on the [die](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Die_(integrated_circuit)) of the CPU also make it much more expensive.

##### Execution units

Execution units of a CPU core are the parts that execute the machine instructions derived from the thread running on the core. There are many different types of execution units in modern CPU cores, each with their own specific function. Notable examples of execution units are; arithmetic logic unit ([ALU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic_logic_unit)), address generation unit ([AGU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Address_generation_unit)) and floating-point unit ([FPU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floating-point_unit)). Discussing the functions and operations of all these execution units is beyond the scope of this text, which will focus on the floating-point execution unit.

###### Superscalar

CPU cores have many execution units, most also have multiple execution units of the same type. Keeping all the execution units busy at the same time requires multiple instructions to be dispatched (one instruction per execution unit) simultaneously. The ability of a CPU core to dispatch multiple instructions simultaneously is called being [superscalar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superscalar_processor), whereas CPU's that can only dispatch a single instruction are called scalar. Superscalar capabilities are a form of [instruction-level parallelism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instruction-level_parallelism).

###### SIMD

[SIMD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SIMD) stands for single instruction, multiple data and is a form of [data level parallelism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_parallelism). SIMD is a vector processing technique, allowing an execution unit to perform the same instruction on multiple data entries (grouped in 1D arrays called vectors) in a single clock cycle. The maximum achievable throughput increases substantially by using SIMD, but does requires all the data to be manipulated in the same way, making it less versatile.

SIMD works by exposing deep [registers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Processor_register) to execution units, containing the data vectors. The instruction that the execution unit receives is performed on the complete register.

###### FMA3 and advanced vector extensions

The floating-point execution units found in modern Intel CPU cores are based on FMA3 (from Haswell on wards). These Fused Multiply Add based units are capable of three different operations:

 - $ a = a \cdot c + b $
 - $ a = b \cdot a + c $
 - $ a = b \cdot c + a $

The Skylake-SP uarch contains two AVX-512 execution units, with 512 bit deep [registers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Processor_register). Each AVX-512 unit contains 8 FMA3 sub-units for "double" floating-point numbers and 16 FMA3 sub-units for "single" floating-point numbers. These AVX-512 execution units form the hardware layer of the [AVX-512](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AVX-512) ISA extension.

The Haswell and Broadwell uarch contain two AVX2 execution units, with 256 bit deep registers. Each AVX2 unit contains 4 FMA3 sub-units for "double" floating-point numbers and 8 FMA3 sub-units for "single" floating-point numbers. These AVX2 execution units form the hardware layer of the [AVX2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Vector_Extensions#Advanced_Vector_Extensions_2) ISA extension.

AMD's latest (at the time of writing) Zen architecture also supports AVX2 instructions (not AVX-512), but the hardware based implementation is completely different. It doesn't have native support for 256 bit deep registers and each AVX2 instruction takes 2 clock cycles to complete, compared to one clock cycle of Intel based AVX2 capable CPU's.

##### Simultaneous multithreading

Simultaneous multithreading (SMT), also known as [Hyper-Threading](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyper-threading), is a technique aimed at increasing the utilization of a CPU core. Each physical CPU core represents multiple logical CPU cores, fully transparent to the Operating System ([OS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operating_system)). Every logical CPU core gets their own thread assignment by the OS, meaning that a single CPU core is tasked with multiple threads. The amount of logical cores per physical core differs from microarchitecture to microarchitecture. The most common is two logical cores per physical core, but Intel [Xeon Phi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xeon_Phi) and IBM [POWER9](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/POWER9) based designs have 4 and up to 8 logical cores per physical core.

When a thread (assigned to a CPU core) is unable to assign tasks to every execution unit of the CPU core, instructions of a different thread assigned to the same CPU core can be dispatched to the unused execution units. One of the most common culprits for a thread to under utilize the execution units, is cache misses. SMT can be very helpful in hiding the latency caused by data requests that require multiple clock cycles to fulfill.

The performance improvements generated by SMT vary wildly with applications, from a factor of two down too a performance decrease. SMT has the largest positive effect in situations where cache-misses are frequent, instruction level parallelism per thread is low and the workloads of the threads are very heterogeneous. Math routines provided by highly optimized libraries, such as the Intel Math Kernel Library ([MKL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Math_Kernel_Library)), generally don't fall into this category, making SMT less beneficial for HPC purposes.

##### Operating frequency

The (high level) building blocks of digital circuits are called [logic gates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logic_gate), which are hardware implementations of boolean operations. These logic gates are combined in intricate ways to provide more high level functionality, like the FMA operation on floating-point data. Synchronization of the logic gates is key for their operation, which is where the [clock signal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clock_signal) comes into play. 

The clock signal of the CPU core is a square wave signal, switching between high and low (logical "on" and "off"). The rising and falling edges of this square wave are the "timing" signals for the logic gates to evaluate their input. The frequency of this timing signal is called the operating frequency or clock frequency of the CPU core. The operating frequency of a CPU core is directly linked to the throughput of [micro-operations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Micro-operation), making it a key factor in the performance of a CPU.

###### Turbo frequencies

Almost all modern CPU's employ some sort of dynamic operating frequency control, allowing the operating frequency of various parts of the CPU to go up or down in conjunction with demand and thermal headroom. Dynamic scaling of the operating frequencies took a flight when mobile devices became more popular, requiring momentary high performance and long battery life. The basic idea behind these techniques is that a relatively high operating frequency can be achieved for a short duration of time. This increases performance for workloads that can be completed within the time frame of the elevated operating frequency, but doesn't significantly increase the overall heat production and power consumption of the CPU. The turbo boost technology of modern CPU's is too complex to discuss in great detail in this text, but a few important aspects pertaining to floating point performance will be explained.

Specifications of the turbo frequencies are very important to the performance of a CPU, but are often reduced to a single number, masking the complete story for marketing purposes. Turbo frequencies scale down according to the workload type (normal, AVX2 and AVX512) and the amount of active cores. AVX512 workloads produce the most heat and highest power consumption because their execution units contain the most transistors, AVX2 execution units require less power and normal (non floating-point) workloads even less than that. 

A more detailed specification of the turbo frequencies of an Intel Xeon Gold 6132 CPU will be provided as an example. Intel ark based information on the [Xeon Gold 6132](https://ark.intel.com/products/123541/Intel-Xeon-Gold-6132-Processor-19_25M-Cache-2_60-GHz) specifies a base frequency of 2.6 GHz and a maximum turbo boost of 3.7 GHz. [WikiChip](https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/WikiChip) provides more details on [this](https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/intel/xeon_gold/6132#Frequencies) page. The highest floating-point performance of the Xeon Gold 6132 is achieved when all cores are utilizing their AVX512 execution units. The maximum turbo frequency of this workload is 2.3 GHz, which is about 40% lower than the maximum frequency (3.7 GHz) provided by Intel Ark.

#### CPU interfaces

As stated earlier, modern CPU's are more akin to SoC's than traditional processors. One of the most significant advancements has been the integration of interfaces onto the CPU package. This allows for higher bandwidth and lower latencies because fewer signals have to pass over [PCB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Printed_circuit_board) traces of the [motherboard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motherboard).

##### Memory controller

The memory controller is the connecting element between the CPU cores and the DRAM memory. Many scientific computing workloads have data sets that don't fit in the cache of the CPU, forcing extensive usage of DRAM memory. These kinds of workloads usually benefit heavily from high bandwidth and low latency main memory, making the memory controller crucial for performance. Modern memory controllers are very complex pieces of engineering and explaining their operation is well beyond the scope of this text, which will focus on their features instead. 

One of the most distinguishing aspects of a memory controller is the amount of [memory channels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-channel_memory_architecture) it supports.
A memory channel is a 64-bit wide interface to a cluster of DRAM chips, usually located on a [DIMM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DIMM). The peak bandwidth can be increased by allowing parallel access to multiple memory channels, making dual channel memory twice as fast as single channel memory, while latency remains unaffected. Typical consumer PC and laptop CPU's have an integrated memory controller capable of dual channel, whereas the Intel Skylake-SP chips contain two memory controller, each supporting triple channel for an effective 6 channel memory system.

A second important aspect of a memory controller/system is support for [Error Correcting Code (ECC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ECC_memory), which is a technique to detect and correct certain memory errors. The information stored in a memory cell can get corrupted by a faulty power supply or interaction with solar radiation, resulting in a "bit flip". ECC capable memory stores additional bits of [parity data](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RAM_parity) to detect and (when possible) repair these corruptions. Bit flips are not very common and most consumer applications don't suffer terribly when they encounter one (system may crash), but bit flips in sensitive, long running and expensive simulations are much more problematic. That is why ECC is almost always employed in servers, despite its drawbacks (higher cost and latency).

##### PCI-express

PCI-express ([Peripheral Component Interconnect Express](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PCI_Express)) is the dominant interconnecting interface for computer components. Basically everything other then DRAM is connected to the CPU via (a derived form of) PCIe (PCI-express), making it a very important element of a computer. Some examples of components that are connected to the CPU via PCIe are:

  - [GPU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphics_processing_unit)
  - [NIC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_interface_controller)
  - [SAS controller](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serial_Attached_SCSI)
  - [NVMe storage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NVM_Express)

PCIe is a serial bus, introduced to replace [PCI(-X)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conventional_PCI) and [AGP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accelerated_Graphics_Port). The PCIe standard has seen multiple revisions (backwards compatible) over the years since its introduction, improving (among other things); bandwidth, power delivery, error correcting overhead and features. The most common implementation of the standard (at the time of writing) is version 3.x, which will be the version that this text considers.

PCIe links consist of "lanes", each lane having four physical connections. Two connections for a [differential](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Differential_signaling) read signal and the other two for a differential write signal, amounting to a [full-duplex](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duplex_(telecommunications)#FULL-DUPLEX) connection. A PCIe link to a device may be a grouping of multiple lanes, ranging from one to 32 lanes per link (x1, x2, x4, x8, x16, x32). GPU's are commonly connected using a x16 link, SAS controllers and NVMe storage typically use a x4/x8 link and single port NIC's have a x1 link. 

The bandwidth of a PCIe v3 x1 link is specified using Giga Transfers per second (GT/s), which specifies the amount of bits that can be transferred from the host to the client or vice versa. The PCIe v3 standard uses 128b/130b encoding for error correcting purposes, meaning that for every 130 bits transmitted, only 128 bits contain data and the remaining two bits contain a form of parity data. This means that a PCIe v3 x1 link of 8 GT/s has a bandwidth of 985 MB/s (8000 x (128/130) x (1/8) = 984.62) and a x16 link has a bandwidth of 15.75 GB/s.

###### DMI

The Direct Media Interface (DMI) interconnect is an Intel specific protocol used to connect the CPU to the Platform Controller Hub ([PCH](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Platform_Controller_Hub)), which is (among other things) responsible for USB and SATA connectivity. DMI is a prime example of an interconnect specification derived from PCIe, with a DMI 3.0 link being nearly equivalent to PCIe v3 x4 link.

##### QPI and UPI

Most high-end servers allow the placement of multiple identical CPU's on the same motherboard, allowing two or four CPU's to be part of the same computer. Intel QuickPath Interconnect ([QPI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intel_QuickPath_Interconnect)) and its successor, Intel UltraPath Interconnect ([UPI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intel_UltraPath_Interconnect)), are interfaces primarily used for inter CPU communication on these multi socket machines.

The bandwidth of the connection between the CPU's can be important in a number of scenarios, for example:

  - Memory bandwidth starved single threaded applications.
  - Threads running on CPU-0 that need to communicate with a GPU connected to CPU-1.
  - Results from threads running on CPU-0 and CPU-1 that need to be combined in a single thread.

The total bandwidth of a QPI/UPI connection is its transfer speed specification times four. The Intel Xeon Gold 6132 has a UPI link speed of 10.6 GT/s, amounting to 42.4 GB/s of bandwidth. Note that this is considerably less then the maximum memory bandwidth of the Xeon Gold 6132, which is 119.21 GiB/s.

#### Graphics card

##### Basics of a GPU

GPU (Graphics Processing Unit), graphics card and video card are all names for the piece of hardware inside a computer that is responsible for creating the image on the display of a PC. GPU's can be divided into two groups; dedicated and integrated. Integrated GPU's are part of the CPU SoC, whereas dedicated GPU's are separate circuitry's, often housed on their own PCB's. These separate PCB's are usually referred to as "cards", which is where the names graphics card and video card stems from.

It should be noted that not all computers have a GPU. Servers and embedded systems are often "headless", which means without a display. They do not explicitly require a GPU, and as such sometimes don't have one. Interfacing with these systems is often possible via a serial connection. However, not having a GPU is very uncommon these days, even for headless servers.

As PC's grew more capable, the tasks placed on GPU's also grew. The traditional GPU was not much more than a [framebuffer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Framebuffer), but the introduction of graphical user interfaces and video games gave rise to 2D and 3D requirements. Filling the frame buffer with data used to be a task of the CPU, but graphics accelerators took over most of the common graphics drawing commands from the CPU. Accelerators for 2D, accelerators for 3D and the frame buffer where combined into a single device now known as a GPU.

Video gaming evolved into a huge industry, requiring ever more powerful GPU's to sustain the demand for graphical compute workloads. The hardware became capable and versatile enough to take over additional tasks from the CPU, most notably media encoding and decoding. At this point, the pattern of the GPU taking over tasks from the CPU was well established. Anticipating that this trend would only continue, reinforced by the first forays of scientific computing on the GPU by manipulating shaders, NVIDIA decided that the way in which programmers should have access to the compute capabilities of GPU's needed to change into a less graphics centered manner. This idea came to fruition in the way of Compute Unified Device Architecture, or CUDA. Other GPU manufacturers followed suit and often provide a similar architecture to CUDA.

###### System on a Chip

Like modern CPU's, GPU's can also be described as systems on a chip, or SoC. They contain many of the same subsystems as modern CPU's:

 - Cores
 - Memory controller
 - Cache
 - Interfaces
 - Video engine

Their functions don't differ that much from their CPU counterparts, other than the fact that they are optimized for their graphics related workloads and the fact that the cores are not of the general purpose kind. This makes it impossible for a GPU to perform certain tasks, like running an operating system.

###### Massively parallel

GPU's have a lot in common with CPU's, but the very specific workloads envisioned for GPU's caused them to be very distinctive in one aspect, they are massively parallel in nature. A typical high end CPU like the Intel Xeon Gold 6132 has a total of 28 floating point execution units, whereas a NVIDIA V100 GPU has 320 floating point execution units.

###### NVIDIA

There are many vendors of GPU's ([AMD](https://www.amd.com/en), [NVIDIA](https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/), [Intel](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/homepage.html), [Imagination Technologies](https://www.imgtec.com/)), most of which have products capable of some sort of compute support via [OpenCL](https://www.khronos.org/opencl/). OpenCL stands for Open Compute Language and is a fully open source and portable framework for compute on CPU's and GPU's. The main competitor of OpenCL is [CUDA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CUDA), which is proprietary to NVIDIA.

CUDA is somewhat older than OpenCL and had a mature implementation before OpenCL, allowing CUDA to develop a head start with respect to the development of a GPGPU compute ecosystem. Combined with the very large dedicated graphics card market share of NVIDIA, results in CUDA being a dominant force in the GPGPU compute world. The most obvious disadvantage of this situation is vendor lock-in in NVIDIA's favor.

Many of the topics that will be discussed are manufacturer agnostic, but certain aspects like hardware design specifics and programming models are manufacturer specific. This text will try to be as generic as possible, but uses NVIDIA product as a baseline. 

##### ISA and IR

The instruction set architecture of a CPU is one of its most defining aspects. The same goes for GPU's, but the effect on the end user is much less severe.

The concept of an ISA was introduced to aid in the quest for code portability. Software was no longer written in machine specific code, but using instructions provided by the ISA. This made it possible for software to run on physically different hardware, as long as they conform to the same ISA. The ISA concept was a huge step towards code portability, but full code portability was not yet achieved. A c++ program compiled on an x86 based computer will not run on an ARM based smartphone, because they adhere to different ISA's.

The next step towards achieving code portability is the [process virtual machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_machine#Process_virtual_machines), sometimes referred to as a "runtime environment". The best known example of a process virtual machine is the Java Virtual Machine, also know as JVM or JRE. A process virtual machine is a piece of software that acts as a [translation layer](https://www.utdallas.edu/~muratk/courses/cloud11f_files/smith-vm-overview.pdf) between the OS/ISA and the process virtual machine target code. All applications that are written (exclusively) in the virtual machine target code can run correctly on all platforms that have the process virtual machine available. This is why pure Python code can run both on an x86 based computer, as well as an ARM based android smartphone.

Code portability is an important concern for GPU's as well. GPU's from NVIDIA have a different ISA then GPU's from AMD, but users still expect that the applications they run on their computer functions correctly, irrespective of the brand of GPU that they have in their system. Achieving this goal is a complex and multifaceted task, but a large part of the solution is the "driver" of the GPU.

A GPU driver is at some level very comparable to a process virtual machine. It is a piece of software that acts as a translation layer between the hardware of the GPU and the "code" it receives. When this "code" is intended to manipulate the image on the screen, it is typically based on a graphics [API](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application_programming_interface) like [OpenGL](https://www.opengl.org/), [Vulkan](https://www.khronos.org/vulkan/) or [DirectX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DirectX). GPGPU applications typically make use of CUDA, OpenCL or other API's capable of GPU offloading, like modern versions of OpenMP and OpenACC.

Because the GPU driver needs to support a plethora of API's, GPU manufacturers generally resort to a solution that contains an intermediate representation (IR). This means that the driver contains various software libraries that map the "commands" of an API to the IR and a piece of software that translates the IR to machine instructions. This IR is the closest thing to an ISA that GPU manufacturers provide, with the commonality that code written in this IR language will run on all systems that contain the IR to machine code translator, just as code compiled for a specific ISA will run on all the hardware that conforms to this ISA.

###### Microarchitecture and extentions

Microarchitectures in the GPU sense are slightly different from microarchitectures in the CPU sense, because they are not really implementations of an ISA. Nevertheless, the various generations of GPU chips are categorized as different microarchitectures.

Extending the functionality of a CPU involves ISA extensions, like AVX2. Extending the functionality of a GPU is achieved somewhat differently, because backwards compatibility can largely be provided by the IR to machine instructions translator software. However, exposing new hardware functionalities to the user sometimes requires additions to the IR language. These additions come in the form of new versions of the IR, which are generally backwards compatible. This means that code that is written in IR language version X will also execute on a system that provides IR language version Y, as long as X < Y.

###### NVIDIA Volta

Maintaining backwards compatibility in software is a lot more flexible then in hardware, which is one of the reasons that succeeding microarchitectures of GPU's can vary rather wildly in design. This makes it prudent to zoom in on a specific microarchitecture, namely NVIDIA [Volta](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volta_(microarchitecture)).

The NVIDIA Volta microarchitecture is developed specifically for GPGPU purposes, and as such is (almost) exclusively used by various incarnations of the Tesla V100 card. It is capable of unrestricted half and double precision floating point operations, has special "tensor" cores and very high memory bandwidth. These features are unavailable to most other NVIDIA consumer grade GPU's (at the time of writing) and are very important to achieving high performance in various GPGPU applications.

##### Programming model

The programming model of a GPU has a more layered structure than the programming model of a traditional CPU based application. The mostly embarrassingly parallel workloads intended for the GPU gave rise to a programming model that was designed from the ground up to cater to the needs of splitting up an application into very many independent pieces. Some of the nomenclature found in the programming model for GPU's is manufacturer specific, but the underlying concepts are usually present in the implementations of all the manufacturers of GPU's. This text will adhere to the names as they are presented in the documentation of [NVIDIA PTX](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/index.html), but the names of the equivalent concepts within OpenCL will be be provided for convenience.

###### CPU programming model

The programming model of a CPU is rather straightforward. An application consists of one or more processes, where mathematical applications almost always use a single process. Such a process consists of the data and the instruction streams (threads) of the application. If an application uses multiple instruction streams to divide the workload, it is said that that application uses "thread level parallelism". Each thread of the process is assigned to one of the available (virtual) CPU cores by the OS, where the instructions contained in the thread are executed (sequentially). When a thread contains SIMD instructions, it is said that the thread uses "instruction level parallelism".

###### Host and device

GPGPU applications always consist of two parts, elements of the application that run on the "host" (CPU) and elements that run on the "device" (GPU). The most important reason to distinguish between host and device is that they both have their own memory pool. The GPU is unable to execute instructions on data that is stored on the "host memory" (main memory) and the CPU is unable to execute instructions on data that is stored on the "device memory" ([VRAM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Video_card#Video_memory)). This necessitates transferring data between host and device, which are (generally) connected via the [PCI-e](https://lucasbekker.github.io/Computer_components#pci-express) interface.

Transferring data to and from the device is a time consuming operation and can easily become a bottleneck for the performance of the application. In an effort to reduce the data transfers to an absolute minimum, management of the data location has been left to the programmer, so that it can be tailored to the requirements of the algorithm of the GPGPU application.

OpenCL: "host" is equivalent to "host device" and "device" is equivalent to "compute device".

###### SPMD and kernel

Single program, multiple data ([SPMD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SPMD)) is the abstraction level that forms the base of the GPU programming model. Comparing SPMD to other members of Flynn's taxonomy shows that the low level concept of "instruction" has been replaced by the high level abstraction "program". This makes it both more accessible to the uninitiated as well as applicable to a wider range of situations. The disadvantage is that the additional abstraction creates a greater distance between the concept and the implementation.

SPMD is a technique that is centered around the idea that a relatively simple and data independent "program" needs to be applied to a large quantity of small data sets. This "program", which is called a [kernel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compute_kernel) in a GPGPU setting, is executed in parallel on the small data sets, reducing the overall runtime compared to a sequential approach.

###### SIMT

A kernel consists of a chain of instructions, which typically contain many floating point operations if they are to be executed on the GPU. Executing these instructions efficiently on many core and deep registers hardware, like GPU's, relies heavily on both instruction level parallelism and thread level parallelism. Combining these two forms of parallelism results in the [MIMD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIMD) architecture as defined by [Flynn's taxonomy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flynn%27s_taxonomy). The problem with MIMD is that the two forms of parallelism encapsulated in MIMD require different programming techniques to utilize, which is undesirable.

[SIMT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_instruction,_multiple_threads) stands for "single instruction, multiple threads" and has been introduced by NVIDIA. It aims to provide a single execution model on hardware that concurs to the MIMD architecture, requiring only one programming technique to utilize. The effort of dividing the workload amongst the different cores and registers of the execution units is much less of a responsibility of the programmer, but more so of the [toolchain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toolchain). GPGPU programming using CUDA relies on SIMT, where the programmer can control various aspects using concepts like "threads", "warps", "blocks" and "grids". This allows the programmer to utilize the hardware in the most effective manner, without having to resort to explicit control over registers. However, it remains important to understand that the SIMT and latency hiding techniques provided by CUDA are basically abstractions of the MIMD architecture and SMT.

###### Threads and warps

A thread in the traditional CPU context is a chain of instructions that can operate on one or more data streams, where multiple data streams are processed in parallel using the SIMD mechanism. The instructions in the thread represent the workload of the execution units in the CPU, meaning that an instruction contains a couple of items:

 - The type of execution unit that should process the instruction.
 - The exact instruction that should be executed.
 - The complete set of input data locations.
 - The complete set of output data locations.

A SIMT "thread" is different because it is more of an abstract concept, as it contains "incomplete" instructions:

 - The type of execution unit that should process the instruction.
 - The exact instruction that should be executed.
 - An incomplete set of input data locations.
 - An incomplete set of output data locations.

This "incomplete" set of input and output data locations represent a single data stream of a SIMD capable execution unit, that is why a SIMT "thread" is sometimes referred to as a "SIMD lane instruction stream".

The advantage of SIMT threads is that they are relatively intuitive, because they represent the workings of the compute kernel at the data stream level. However, they have the disadvantage that they do not have a simple mapping to the hardware that is supposed to execute them. This mapping of the threads to the "real" hardware instructions mostly comes down to grouping them such that a single group contains threads with compatible "incomplete" instruction sequences. This grouping of threads serves to fill the deep registers of the execution units and a single group of threads is called a "warp".

The toolchain is responsible for grouping the threads into warps, which reduces the workload of the programmer. The downside of this loss of explicit control is that threads that contain data dependant diverging control flow patterns, like "if else" blocks, might be grouped together in a single warp. This means that various subsections of the same warp have to perform different instructions, which is against the intended operation of warps. This problem is circumvented by applying a "mask" to the threads of a warp, defining if a thread is active or not. This ensures that all the active threads of the warp perform the same instruction, with the various differing subsections of the warp masked consecutively.

OpenCL: "thread" is equivalent to "work item" and "warp" is equivalent to "wavefront".

##### Streaming Multiprocessors

###### Superscalar

###### Cache

###### Cuda cores and execution units

###### SMT

##### Memory

##### Operating frequency

###### Turbo

##### Interfaces

###### PCI-e

###### NVLink